A fiber optic cable is a network cable that contains strands of glass fibers inside an insulated casing. They're designed for long distance, very high performance data networking and telecommunications. Compared to wired cables, fiber optic cables provide higher bandwidth and can transmit data over longer distances. Fiber optic cables support much of the world's internet, cable television and telephone systems.There are, three common types of fiber optic cables, as listed below. 

The single-mode step-index fiber cable, sometimes called a single-mode fiber cable. The single and multimode step-index fiber cables are the simpplest types. Single-mode fiber cables have extremely small core diameters, ranging from 5 to 9.5 um.Single-mode fibers have the potential to carry signals for long distances with low loss, and are mainly used in communication systems. The number of modes that propagate in a single-mode fiber depends on the wavelength of light carried. A wavelength of 980nm results in multimode operation. As the wavelength is increased, the fiber carries fewer and fewer modes until only one mode remains. Single-mode operation begins when the wavelength approaches the core diameter. At 1310 nm, for example, the fiber cable permits only one mode. It then operates as a single-mode fiber cable.

The multimode step-index fiber cable, sometimes called a multimode fiber cable. Multimode fiber cables have bigger diameters that their single-mode counerparts, with core diameters ranging from 100 to 970 um. They are available as glass fibers (a glass core and glass cladding), plastic-clas silica (a glass core and plastic cladding), and plastic fibers (a plastic core and cladding). They are also the widest ranging, although not the most efficient in long distances, and they experience higher losses than the single-mode fiber cables. Multimode fiber cables have the potential to carry signals for moderate and long distance with low loss (when optical amplifiers are used to boost the signals to the required power). Plastic fiber optic cable is available in Fiberstore,  it is an optical fiber made out of plastic rather than traditional glass. It offers additional durability for uses in data communications, as well as decoration, illumination and industrial application. FiberStore provides both simplex and duplex plastic optical fibers.

Multimode graded-index fiber are sometimes called graded-index fiber cables (GRIN). Graded-index and multimode fiber cables have similar diameters. Common graded-index fibers have core diameters of 50,62.5, or 85 um, with a cladding diameter of 125 um. The core consist of numerous concentric layers of glass, somewhat like the annular rings of a tree or a piece of onion. Each successive layer expanding outward from the central axis of the core until the inner diameter of the cladding has a lower index of refrection. Light travels faster in an optical material that has a lower index of refraction. Thus, the further the light is from the centre axis, the greater its speed. This type of fiber optic cable is popular in applications that require a wide range of wavelenths, in particular telecommunication, scanning, imaging, and data processing stystems. In particular telecommunication,  Multimode OM4 fiber optic cable is used in any data center looking for high speeds of 10G or even 40G or 100G. OM4 multimode fiber are ideal for using in many applications such as Local Area Networks (LAN) backbones, Storage Area Networks (SAN), Data Centers and Central Offices.
